



dispatch                                                    BGP. Peabody
Internet-Draft                                         February 18, 2020
Updates: 4122 (if approved)
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: August 21, 2020


                           UUID Format Update
               draft-peabody-dispatch-new-uuid-format-00

Abstract

   This document presents a new UUID format (version 6) which is suited
   for use as a database key.

   A common case for modern applications is to create a unique
   identifier to be used as a primary key in a database table that is
   ordered by creation time, difficult to guess and has a compact text
   format.  None of the existing UUID versions fulfill each of these
   requirements.  This document is a proposal to update [RFC4122] with a
   new UUID version that addresses these concerns.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 21, 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Peabody                  Expires August 21, 2020                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2020


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Summary of Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.  Version 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Timestamp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.3.  Clock Sequence and Node Parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.4.  Alternate Text Formats  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       3.4.1.  Base64 Text (Variant A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       3.4.2.  Base32 Text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2.  Background

   A lot of things have changed in the time since UUIDs were originally
   created.  Modern applications have a need to use (and many have
   already implemented) UUIDs as database primary keys.  However some
   properties of the existing specification are not well suited to this
   task.

   The motivation for using UUIDs as database keys stems primarily from
   the fact that applications are increasingly distributed in nature.
   Simplistic "auto increment" schemes with integers in sequence do not
   work well in a distributed system since the effort required to
   synchronize such numbers across a network can easily become not worth
   it.  The fact that UUIDs can be used to create unique and reasonably
   short values in distributed systems without requiring synchronization
   makes them a good candidate for use as a database key in such
   environments.





Peabody                  Expires August 21, 2020                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2020


   However, most of the existing UUID versions have poor database index
   locality.  Meaning new values created in succession are not close to
   each other in the index and thus require inserts to be performed at
   random locations.  The negative performance effects of which on
   common structures used for this (B-tree and its variants) can be
   dramatic.  Newly inserted values should be time-ordered to address
   this.  Version 1 UUIDs are time-ordered, but have other issues (see
   next).

   A point of convenience and simplicity of implementation is that
   custom sort ordering logic should not be needed to put time ordered
   values in sequence.  It is possible to sort Version 1 UUIDs by time
   but it requires breaking the bytes of the UUID into various pieces to
   determine the order (from the timestamp).  Implementations would be
   simplified with a sort order where the UUID can simply be treated as
   an opaque sequence of bytes and ordered as such.  This covers the
   first 64 bits of the UUID.

   The latter portion (the last 64 bits) are in essence used to provide
   uniqueness.

   Privacy and network security issues arise from using a MAC address in
   the node field of Version 1 UUIDs.  Exposed MAC addresses can be used
   to locate machines to attack and can reveal various information about
   such machines (minimally manufacturer, potentially other details).

   The use of MAC addresses in UUID Version 1, and the other hashing
   schemes used in the various versions, points to a more basic issue:
   There is no known way to guarantee "universal uniqueness".  In fact,
   uniqueness needs are application-specific.  MAC addresses in the node
   field might be okay for some applications.  Others might be okay with
   using cryptographically secure random numbers (possibly with
   increased risk of collision).  Still others might already have a
   predefined means to determine uniqueness for the application in
   question, such as a server node number.  In an attempt to ensure
   uniqueness, the existing UUID format over-specifies exactly how this
   uniqueness is determined.  This document posits the idea that while
   such mechanisms as MAC address may be okay for certain applications,
   it should be treated as a suggestion, not a requirement for proper
   implementation.  Many applications will work perfectly well with more
   narrow and simpler uniqueness mechanisms (like using an existing node
   ID from whatever cluster the server is already in) and that this
   should be allowed as long as the uniqueness properties are clearly
   specified in the implementation.  I.e. "using this field type as a
   database primary key will produce UUIDs which are unique within this
   database cluster" should be perfectly acceptable.  Some other
   unnecessary requirement of global/universal uniqueness should not be
   needed for the implementation to be considered correct.



Peabody                  Expires August 21, 2020                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2020


   The property of "unguessability" is also application-specific.  Some
   applications may desire increased security by using UUIDs which are
   difficult to guess (this way for example rate-limiting can be used to
   greatly reduce the probabililty of someone correctly guessing a new
   identifier or at least make it harder/take longer to do so).  While
   applications should of course be using proper security measures, and
   relying solely on the unguessability of an identifier for security
   purposes is ill-advised, it is certainly not wrong to use this
   property as an additional layer of security.  Examples of measures
   used to increase unguessability would be using cryptographically
   secure random data in the node and/or clock sequence fields (latter
   64 bits), or using such random data in the subsecond portion of the
   timestamp (if subsecond time ordering is less important than
   unguessability for the application in question).  The specification
   should indicate that such variations are acceptable as they do not
   change the format in an incompatible way.

   Using a UUID as a database key generally requires communicating that
   UUID to other applications.  The database server will store the value
   internally.  It may be referenced in a query language (e.g.  SQL),
   and/or transmitted in some database driver protocol.  Other software,
   often written in another language, frequently then needs to store
   this identifier in its own memory and potentially perform its own
   operations like sorting and searching with it.  And such identifiers
   are also commonly then used in protocols like HTTP where they
   indicate a particular resource.  Sometimes they are typed in by
   humans.  Sometimes constraints exist on which bytes may be used (such
   as an HTTP URL path).  In most cases, shorter is better.

   For these reasons, having a compact textual format is important.  The
   existing hex format is already in wide use, so keeping it for
   backward compatibility makes sense.  However an encoding using a
   base32 alphabet would be more compact and still be case-insensitive.
   A base64 alphabet would be even more compact (but require case-
   sensitivity).  This document proposes both as options.  This would
   allow applications to use a more compact text format for the
   situations needing textual representation (i.e. you can just put this
   value in URL and it is not unnecessarily long and does not require
   escaping).  The alphabets used for base32 and base64 encoding should
   be in ASCII numeric value sequence so the text forms can also be
   sorted correctly as raw bytes.  (This is not a property of the Base32
   and Base64 standards from [RFC4648], however there are several
   variations in use so introducing a new one here for the express
   purpose of correct sorting would seem to be acceptable.)







Peabody                  Expires August 21, 2020                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2020


3.  Summary of Changes

   The following is a summary of proposed changes to the UUID
   specification in [RFC4122].  Each is given as a statement of the
   problem or limitation to which it is addressed, along with a
   description of the proposed change.

3.1.  Version 6

   A UUID version 6 is proposed.  It is ordered by creation time, sorts
   correctly as raw bytes, does not require use of a MAC address in the
   node section and has options for a compact text format.

3.2.  Timestamp

   The timestamp value from [RFC4122] (60-bit number of 100- nanosecond
   intervals since 00:00:00.00, 15 October 1582) is workable but the
   sequence in which the bytes are encoded (the lowest bytes first)
   results in unnecessary additional logic to sort correctly by
   timestamp.  Ordering by timestamp is important for the use case of
   UUIDs as primary keys in a database since it improves locality by
   grouping new records close to each other (this can have major
   performance implications in large tables).

   The proposed change is to encode the timestamp value into the same 60
   bits as in [RFC4122] but in big-endian byte ordering.  This way an
   application can sort by timestamp by simply treating the UUID as an
   opaque bunch of bytes.

3.3.  Clock Sequence and Node Parts

   The latter 64 bits of a UUID per [RFC4122] are the clock sequence and
   node fields.  The node field is problematic as it encourages
   applications to use their MAC address which may present a security
   problem (it is not always appropriate to reveal the network address
   of a machine as it could make it the target of an attack or provide
   information about its manufacturer or other details).  A lesser
   concern is that it also incidentally produces UUID with the same 6
   bytes at the end and are visually more difficult to distinguish when
   looking at them in a list.

   Seeing as the entire point of these last 64 bits is to ensure
   uniqueness, this document proposes that the strict definitions of
   clock sequence and node be relaxed.  Instead implementations would be
   permitted to fill this section with random bytes and/or include an
   application defined value for uniqueness (such as a node number of a
   machine in a cluster).




Peabody                  Expires August 21, 2020                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2020


   Note for discussion: Another point to consider is that there is no
   known way to fully guarantee that that duplicate identifiers will not
   be created unless some per-determined outside source of uniqueness is
   employed.  (Such as for version 1 UUIDs the MAC address.)  However,
   applications each have their own requirements for uniqueness.
   Uniqueness within a single database cluster for example is acceptable
   in many cases.  A specification that forces all UUIDs to be globally
   unique when it is not needed might not be a good idea.  Identifiers
   are only as universally unique as their input, so it might be better
   to just clearly state this and say that it's fine if UUIDs are only
   guaranteed to be unique within a specific context if it makes sense
   for that application.

3.4.  Alternate Text Formats

   The existing UUID text format is hex encoded plus four hyphens.  For
   many applications this is unnecessarily verbose.  The same
   information can be encoded into significantly fewer bytes using a
   base 64 or base 32 alphabet.

   Many applications have a need to use the unique identifier of a
   database record in a URL (e.g. in an HTTP request either in the path
   or a query parameter).  It can also be useful as a file name.  Being
   able to use a UUID for this purpose without having to escape certain
   characters it is a useful property.

   This document proposes alternate alphabets for encoding UUIDs which
   are convenient for use in URLs and file names, and also sort
   correctly when treated as raw bytes.  Some applications may not have
   the ability (or want) to encode and decode UUIDs from text to binary
   and thus having the text format also sort correctly as raw bytes is
   useful.

   The standard Base64 and Base32 specifications in [RFC4648] do not
   have these properties, thus different alphabets are given for each.

   Situations which require understanding the encoding SHOULD specify
   which encoding is used.  For example, a database field which uses
   UUID version 6 with "b64a" encoding (see below), could be specified
   as type "UUID6B64A", which would result in binary storage according
   to UUID version 6, and otherwise read and write the value to/from
   applications in the b64a text format shown below.  Note also that the
   length can be easily used to positively distinguish if a value is
   text or binary form.  A 16-byte value will necessarily be raw
   unencoded bytes whereas text forms will be longer.






Peabody                  Expires August 21, 2020                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2020


3.4.1.  Base64 Text (Variant A)

   UUIDs encoded in this form use the "url-safe base64" alphabet: "A" to
   "Z", "a" to "z", "0" to "9" and "-" and "_", but in ASCII value
   sequence.  No padding characters are used.

   The name "b64a" (not case sensitive) can be used by implementations
   to refer to this encoding.

   Note: It might be useful to add another variation ("b64b") with a
   different alphabet.  Hyphen and underscore are useful in a lot of
   places but there might be some others that are better for specific
   cases.

3.4.2.  Base32 Text

   Base32 can be useful if case-insensitivity is required.

   UUIDs encoded in this form use digits "2" through "7" followed by "A"
   through "Z" (same alphabet as in [RFC4648] but in ASCII value
   sequence).  Case is not sensitive.  Implementations MAY choose to
   output lower case letters and doing so is also correct.
   Implementations which parse UUIDs encoded in this way MUST be case
   insensitive.  No padding characters are used.

   The name "b32a" (not case sensitive) can be used by implementations
   to refer to this encoding.

4.  Acknowledgements

   TBD

5.  IANA Considerations

   TBD

6.  Security Considerations

   TBD

7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.





Peabody                  Expires August 21, 2020                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2020


   [RFC4122]  Leach, P., Mealling, M., and R. Salz, "A Universally
              Unique IDentifier (UUID) URN Namespace", RFC 4122,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4122, July 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4122>.

   [RFC4648]  Josefsson, S., "The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data
              Encodings", RFC 4648, DOI 10.17487/RFC4648, October 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4648>.

Author's Address

   Brad G. Peabody

   Email: brad@peabody.io





































Peabody                  Expires August 21, 2020                [Page 8]